[ADR 022] Authorization (#394)
bitwarden/contributing-docs: docs/architecture/adr/0022-server-authorization.md

### Terminology

- **Authentication** is the process of verifying a user's identity. ("Who are you?") It tells you
  who they are, but not what they can do
- **Authorization** is the process of determining who can access or modify a resource. ("Are you
  allowed to do this?") It may or may not require authentication
- **Validation** is the process of determining whether a request is valid according to business
  logic. ("Can this be done?") Unlike authorization, it usually does not depend on the user's
  identity (authentication) or permissions (authorization). For example, a vault item cannot be
  restored unless it has first been (soft) deleted
- **Resources** are data on the server that a user may try to access or modify - such as a vault
  item, organization, collection, or group
- **User verification** is a Bitwarden-specific UI flow aimed at re-establishing a user's identity
  before they perform a sensitive action. e.g. entering your password again before viewing an api
  key. This is an aspect of authentication, because it relates to verifying the user's identity

### Current patterns

To date, we have broadly used the following authorization patterns:

> - in the individual user context, we match the user ID in the JWT to the resource being accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the individual user context, we match the user ID in the JWT to the resource being accessed.
```

⛏️ since it's multiple sentences.

>   This is usually a one-to-one match (e.g. the JWT user id should match the cipher user id) without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This is usually a one-to-one match (e.g. the JWT user ID should match the cipher user ID) without
```

⛏️ for everywhere this is lowercase.

  additional requirements

> - in organizational contexts, we use role-based authorization, where the user is assigned a role in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In organizational contexts, we use role-based authorization, where the user is assigned a role in
```

  an organization and permission is granted or denied based on that role. This closely tracks
  [how access control is presented to the user](https://bitwarden.com/help/user-types-access-control/).
  However, the expansion of collections has complicated this simple model, and it now looks more
  like

>   [attribute-based access control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attribute-based_access_control)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [attribute-based access control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attribute-based_access_control).
```

This logic is spread throughout controllers in the API layer, JWT claims accessed via
`CurrentContext`, the core service layer, and database queries.

### Requirements

Our authorization requirements have increased in complexity, particularly with the release of

> collection management enhancements. Today, the outcome of an authorization decision in respect of an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collection management enhancements. Today, the outcome of an authorization decision relevant to an
```

organization resource could depend on the user's role, their collection relationships, organization
settings, provider relationships, and other factors.

A solution to this problem should:

- separate authorization logic from other concerns
- centralize authorization logic in a single location or pattern as much as possible
- separate authorization logic from authorization checks/enforcement
- be reusable between endpoints that access the same resource

> - support a range of authorization logic (e.g. based on role, resource, relationships, etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- support a range of authorization logic (e.g. based on role, resource, relationships, etc.)
```

makes authorization decisions based on the **resource** being accessed, the **user** accessing the
resource, and the **operations** (actions) they wish to take on the resource.

To define authorization logic, developers implement one or more `IAuthorizationHandler` classes for
the resource being accessed.

Authorization checks are handled by the default implementation of `IAuthorizationService`, which
calls each authorization handler for the resource to find at least 1 that will authorize the action.

#### Advantages

- included in ASP.NET - standard C# code, no additional dependencies
- already used by Secrets Manager and for some collection operations in Password Manager
- handlers provide good encapsulation of authorization logic, separate to other concerns and the
  `AuthorizationService` implementation itself
- the fixed `AuthorizationService` interface enforces a consistent usage across our teams
- teams can write and have code ownership over their own authorization handlers
- flexibly supports additional sources of authorization (e.g. scoped user API keys) by defining
  additional handlers

#### Disadvantages

> - the interface works well for specific resources, but less well for bulk read operations (e.g.

Reviewer: ⛏️ Same comments. I would just capitalize all bullets and end them in periods as if they are sentences.

  reading all items the user has access to). Bulk read operations are likely to duplicate some of
  the authorization logic in another class or database query
- server-side solution only - client code needs to maintain its own logic to enable/disable UI flows
  (although given the offline requirements of our clients, this is difficult to avoid)
- we need to be mindful of database calls within authorization handlers, as they may be called in a
  loop for each resource being authorized

> ### Third party solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Third-party solution
```

> Third party solutions include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including but not limited to:
```

  different models

Each has its own domain-specific language (DSL) used to define authorization rules as well as a
storage layer to store access information about the users and objects in the application. The
storage is generally a separate database to the Bitwarden database and must be kept up-to-date with
users' roles and relationships in Bitwarden.

#### Advantages

- the DSLs appear to be a flexible and robust way to define an authorization model
- support for complex permission structures
- reduces load on the Bitwarden database, designed for high performance
- single source of truth, strongly separated from our application logic

#### Disadvantages

- vendor lock-in for a core part of our architecture
- new concepts and a DSL unfamiliar to most developers - would probably require a single team to
  become experts in this and maintain it for all teams, which does not work well with our team
  structure
- very costly to implement in terms of engineering resources, particularly for developers, BRE and
  SRE
- risk of the authorization data store becoming out of step with the main Bitwarden database
- may be over-engineered for our current requirements and scale

> ### Custom Solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Custom solution
```

  - the authorization handlers may need to fetch additional data from the database to make a
    decision. This may cause many database reads, particularly when iterating over multiple items,
    unless an additional caching solution is implemented. This is probably manageable for now by
    caching frequently needed data in `CurrentContext` or the handler itself, both of which are
    scoped to the lifetime of the request
- for the reasons above, it is not a complete solution: it would cover _most_ but not all of our use
  cases
- server-side solution only - client code (particularly in Admin Console) needs to continue to
  maintain its own duplicate logic to determine what UI flows it should show/hide and enable/disable
- a server endpoint needs to understand what resources are affected, which can be nuanced when
  dealing with relational data (e.g. saving a vault item may require separate authorization checks
  for the `Cipher` resource and the `CollectionCipher` relationship). However, this may be an issue
  for other solutions as well, as our endpoints often update multiple resources at once

### [OpenFGA](https://openfga.dev)

#### Summary

> OpenFGA is an open-source implementation of Google's Zanzibar authorization system, which is used

Reviewer: 🎨 Link to https://research.google/pubs/zanzibar-googles-consistent-global-authorization-system/.

makes authorization decisions based on a user's relationship to an object (resource):

> Authorization decisions are then yes or no answers to the question: "Does user U have relation R
> with object O?".

To start using OpenFGA:

- you define your authorization scheme (in terms of users, objects, and relationships) in its DSL
- you seed the OpenFGA store (database) with your current users, objects, and relationships, which
  it will use to make authorization decisions
- you keep the OpenFGA store up-to-date with any changes in your underlying data (e.g. as users are
  added and removed). Changes to the Bitwarden database _do not_ automatically update the OpenFGA
  store

OpenFGA then supports the following queries:

- "check requests" (does user U have relation R with object O?) - for simple authorization checks
- "list objects requests" (get all objects with which user U has relationship R) - for bulk read
  operations
- "list users requests" (get all users that have relationship R with object O)

OpenFGA has a [.NET SDK](https://github.com/openfga/dotnet-sdk) and a
[Javascript SDK](https://github.com/openfga/js-sdk) with Typescript types.

> #### Advantages

Reviewer: ℹ️ Interesting case study to me: https://medium.com/building-carta/authz-cartas-highly-scalable-permissions-system-782a7f2c840f

- immutable, versioned authorization models allow for graceful changes to and between authorization
  structures

#### Disadvantages

- additional external dependency that is not easily replaced once installed. However, it is
  supported by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (itself part of the Linux Foundation), see also
  its [list of adopters](https://github.com/openfga/community/blob/main/ADOPTERS.md)
- new concepts and a DSL unfamiliar to most developers - would probably require a single team to
  become experts in this and maintain it for all teams
- heavy implementation impact on engineering resources:
  - requires remodelling of our authorization logic around OpenFGA concepts
  - BRE/SRE resources to support the OpenFGA deployment and separate database
  - rewrite not just authorization checks, but any write operations (commands) to ensure that the
    OpenFGA store is always kept in step with the Bitwarden database
- probably not compatible with Bitwarden Unified due to resource constraints (assumption only) -
  unclear what would replace it in this case (more research required if we are considering this
  option)

> ### Casbin

Reviewer: 🎨 Link to https://casbin.org/.

> // TODO

Reviewer: 💭 on their flexible storage model being easier and therefore an advantage for self-host.
